In this section, we are discussing a question that how will you handle timer based events in JavaScript?
The category of this question is DOM and web related question, and we will discuss four different questions
which can be asked related to this topic.
Let's begin with the answer.
So to handle the timer based events.
There are two methods globally available called set timeout and set interval.
When I say globally, it means that both said timeout and set interval are part of the window object.
So these two methods can be used to handle timer based events.
Set timeout.
Execute only once after a given number of intervals that is set interval keeps on executing.
Let's check both the methods practically.
We will begin with set timeout.
The syntax of said timeout is like this, that the first parameter is the function name, which you
want to call, and the second parameter is the interval that is milliseconds.
Let's say you give 1000 milliseconds.
That means it will be 1/2.
Let's try a code sample with this.
I have a kind of template where I have an action and I have given an idea also to it and also a button.
When I click on this button, then it's going to call a function called try timer and that will execute
the set timeout when the set timeout is executed.
We are going to change the text of this action.
Let's try that.
Here, I'll say set timeout.
Assume that I'm going to call a function named list and that is after 2 seconds.
That is 2000 milliseconds.
Now, I'm going to write a function here.
I'll say function test.
And inside this because I want to change the text of Aaron.
I will say document part get element by ID the name of the action is D, D, and the value of that H1
is referred to with enriched HTML.
And here I will say timed out.
That's it.
I will save this and let's execute the output.
All right, so now I'm clicking on this button start timer.
So as you can see that after 2 seconds, this message is changed.
This is what I said.
Time out.
There's as I mention, it executes only once.
It doesn't keep on executing.
If you want that, it should execute constantly.
Then we will use set interval.
But before we move to set interval, I would also like to change the syntax here.
The function which we have written here that has a name that is we have a named function.
But let's say you have a small process to execute.
Then you can go with anonymous function.
That is a function without a name.
So I can simply say function or I can go with arrow function also.
Let me begin with function itself.
First of all, the traditional way.
I mean, I don't give a name of the function and this statement which we have written in this test function
that I will shift.
And pasted here and I will remove this.
Best function.
Saving the file and refresh.
And we executed a.
So we still have the same output compared to the previous score.
What we have done here is we have just written an anonymous function.
Of course, instead of writing the traditional function, I can go with arrow function as well.
Right.
So I can say I remove the function quiver and put an arrow.
So this is converted into an arrow function.
Let's write that time out with arrow function.
Let's go to the browser.
I will refresh the screen.
Click on the start timer.
And after 2 seconds, we have this message.
So here said timeout.
We have tried with a function with a name and an anonymous function is also a valid syntax.
It all depends on your choice so that you have more lines to execute or you have few lines.
If you have few lines, you can go with this anonymous syntax or you can try the function with her name.
In short said Timeout will execute the process and the job is done.
Set interval, on the other hand, keeps on executing the process.
The syntax is similar to set timeout.
That is, it can take a function with a name or an anonymous function and the second parameter is interval
in milliseconds.
Let's try set interval with an example.
Now instead of said timeout, I'm just going to say set interval.
Not because the message is same.
We will not get the idea whether it is constantly executing it or not.
So what we can do, we can take a variable here.
Let's say I take variable LED counter is equal to zero, right?
And here I'm going to assign the counter instead of a message.
And every time the interval is executed, I'm going to increment the counter and let's change the milliseconds
out.
So instead of 2 seconds I will see 1/2.
That is 1000 milliseconds.
The rest of the code remains same.
That is when I click on this start timer.
This dry timer will be executed and it's going to update the counter in the action.
Let's go to the browser.
I will refresh and click on the start timers.
Now, as you can see, we have this start timer button clicking and constantly the counter is getting
updated.
So this is the difference between said timeout and set interval.
That set interval doesn't stop.
But what if you want to stop it?
If you want to stop it, then you can use a matter called clear interval, which can be used to stop
the interval.
Let's try that.
Let's have another button.
Here, we'll say.
Let me stop the timer.
And I can say stop.
Timeout is the method I want to execute.
That is the function we are going to create.
So here I will create a function called stop timer.
Now the question is, even if I write clear interval.
The syntax is that we need to pass a timer reference inside this clear interval.
So when we create this interval, we have to take it in an object that is the interval reference.
We have to take it in an object.
So what will we do?
We will create a global object seeing, let's say timer object right here.
I will say that the object is equal to set interval.
So now what happens?
The interval which we have created is assigned to this object and that we are going to pass here.
I'll say I want to stop the D object.
So clear interval anti object.
I am saving this to go back to the output.
Let's refresh this.
As a start timer, which starts the timer.
And now when I click on the stop timer, it has stopped again.
If I want to say the start timer, it starts from the next counter and when I click on the stop timer
it stops it because we are using the clear interval method here.
One more important thing is when we are calling the get element by ID, we're using the document object.
But here with a clear interval, set interval or set timeout, we are not using document object because
these methods like clear interval are set interval or even set timeout for that matter is not part of
document object.
They are part of the global object call window.
So certainly you can see window that said time out or window that set interval, but you don't need
that because anyway, it's a global object.
So now you know how you can deal with various time related events in JavaScript.
Let's discuss related questions of this topic.
The first question can be explained the difference between said timeout and set interval.
So now you already know that set timeout executes only once, whereas the interval is something which
keeps on executing.
The second question is why can't we write, document or set time out our document set interval that
also we have discussed that said interval or time out, they are actually part of window object and
not the document object.
Third question, how can you stop a timer?
So we have used a clear interval.
Remember that whenever you use set interval you can use.
Let me share the code you can use without this diabetes.
That is any reference we are taking.
If you are using without reference, then you have no scope to stop the interval at a later stage.
In case if you need to have a functionality to stop the interval, then certainly you will have to use
an object, right?
Which takes the reference off it and then you use clear interval on that object which will stop that
interval.
You can have multiple intervals and each interval can have different object which you can handle.
That means you can start and stop any time.
And the fourth question is.
This is a kind of practical question that how will you create a digital clock?
Now, when it comes to creating a digital clock, let me go back to the code.
We have shown a counter now instead of this, if I simply say.
New date, which will return date and time both.
Right.
You can format the time only, but at the moment I'm just saying new date every time after every second
I just want to assign the new date.
So let's go to the output.
I'll say start timer.
As you can see now, the clock is ticking because every second the new date is assigned and date also
has the timer section.
Of course, you can change this.
You can give a format so that it shows only the clock, not the date along with it.
Right.
And certainly this has more functionality that is stopping the timer because we have already stopped
the timer in the call.
So this answers the fourth question.
So this is it for this question related to the timer events.